The science that pursues an understanding of planet earth.
Examines the materials composing earth and seeks to understand the many processes that operate beneath and upon its surface.
To understand earth's origins and its development through time.
A fundamental principal that is a pillar of geology today. It states that the physical, chemical, and biological processes that operate today have also operated in the geological past.
The concept that earth was shaped by catastrophic events of a short-term nature.
A scientific hypothesis is a proposed explanation for a certain phenomenon that occures in the natural world
When a scientific hypothesis has survived extensive strutiny and when competing hypothesis have been eliminated, it may be then called a theory.
scientists gather data through observation and formulate scientific hypotheses and theories.
a dynamic mas of water that is continually on the move, evaporating from the oceans to the atmosphere, precipitating to the land, and running back into the ocean again.
Earth is surrounded by a life-giving gaseous envelope called the atmosphere.
The biosphere includes all life on earth.
Beneath the atmosphere and the oceans is the solid earth, or geosphere.
This endevor aims to study earth as a system composed of numerous interacting parts, or subsystems.
A system is a group of interacting or interdependent parts that form a complex whole.
Proposes that the bodies of our solar system evolved from an enormous rotating cloud called the solar nebula.
The cloud of intersteller gas and/or dust from which the bodies of our solar system formed.
A very thin, outer most layer of earth.
One of earth's compositional layers. The solid rocky shell that extends from the base of the crust to a depth of 2900 kilometers (1800 miles).
"rock sphere" consists of the entire crust plus the uppermost mantle and forms earth's relatively cool, rigid outter shell.
"weak sphere" a soft, comparatively weak layer under the lithosphere layer.
The lowest portion of the upper mantle.
The part of the mantle that extends from the core -- mantle boundry to a depth of 660 kilometers (410 miles)
The inner most layer of earth. It is thought to be largely an iron - nickel alloy, with minor amounts of oxygen, silicon, and sulfer.
A layer beneath the mantle about 2270 kilometers (1410 miles) thick, which has the properties of a liquid.
The solid innermost layer of earth about 1216 kilometers (754 miles) in radius.
A model that illustrates the origin of the 3 basic rock types and the interrelatedness of earth materials and processes.
Rock formed from the crystallization of magma.
Unconsolidated particles created by the weathering and erosion of rock by chemical precipitation from solution in water or from the secretions of organisms, and transported by water, wind, or glaciers.
Rock formed from the weathered products of preexisting rocks that have been transported, deposited, and lithified.
Rock formed by the alteration of preexisting rock deep withi earth (but still in the solid state) by heat, pressure, and/or chemically active fluids.
A deep submarine region that lies beyond the continental margins.
A large, continuous area of land that includes the adjacent continental shelf and islands that are structurally connected to the mainland.
The portion of the sea floor that is adjacent to the continents. It may include the continental shelf, continental slope, and continental rise.
The gently sloping submerged portion of the continental margin extending from the shoreline to the contenental slope.
The steep gradient that leads to the deep-ocean floor and marks the seaward edge of the continental shelf.
<coninental rise def here>
